- Ali, H. Baynouna, L. and Bernsen, R. (2010) Barriers and
facilitators of weight management: Perspectives of Arab
women at risk for type 2 diabetes. Health and Social Care
in the Community, 18, 219-228.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2524.2009.00896.x


Abstract
Obesity and associated chronic diseases, such as type 2 diabetes, are highly prevalent in the United Arab Emirates (UAE). This qualitative study explored weight management behaviours and perceptions of women who are at increased risk for type 2 diabetes through focus group interviews. A total of 75 Emirati national women (age, 20–60 years) considered high risk for type 2 diabetes participated in eight focus groups. Purposive sampling was used to recruit women from primary healthcare centres (PHCs) in Al Ain, UAE. Qualitative research methodology involving a modified approach to grounded theory was used to guide data collection and analysis. Focus group interviews transcripts were thematically analyzed using NVivo software. A number of personal, social and physical environmental themes emerged as both barriers and enablers that are consistent with the social ecological model of health promotion. Low motivation, lack of social support, competing demands, lack of culturally‐sensitive exercise facilities and sociocultural norms that restrict outdoor physical activities were the main barriers cited by the participants. On the other hand, social support, such as having other women to walk with, helped them stay physically active. Suggestions from the participants included enhancing social support for women, greater access to dietitians and nutrition information, and increasing availability of culturally‐sensitive exercise facilities. This study provides valuable information in the development of culturally congruent healthy weight promotion programmes for women at risk for type 2 diabetes in the UAE and has implications for obesity intervention programmes for women in other Arabian Gulf countries.

Methodology
Methods
Study design
Qualitative research methods were deemed to be the most appropriate to allow themes to emerge due to the limited knowledge available on this topic. We used a modified grounded theory approach to guide data collection and analysis (Cutcliffe 2005). A modified grounded theory approach involves the use of defined research questions or hypotheses while retaining the key features of grounded theory features, such as iterative nature of data collection and analysis and data saturation (Glaser & Strauss 1967, Strauss & Corbin 1990, Creswell 1998). Our study was designed to address three broad questions: (1) What are the attitudes of Emirati women at risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus towards weight management?; (2) What factors do Emirati women perceive as barriers to weight reduction and maintenance of a healthy weight?; and (3) What suggestions do Emirati women have in the development of intervention programmes to promote healthier weights? The study was conducted in the PHCs affiliated with the Al Ain Medical District, Al Ain, UAE. Al Ain Medical District has 19 urban and semi-rural PHC centres providing comprehensive healthcare services to a national and expatriate population of approximately 400 000.

Data collection
Following approval from the Al Ain Medical District Human Research Ethics Committee, a letter explaining the purpose and participant inclusion criteria was sent to PHCs in Al Ain Medical District that serve predominantly Emirati citizens. Purposive sampling strategy (Mays & Pope 2000) was used to recruit participants. Doctors in the selected health centres invited Emirati national women, 18 years of age and older with no previous diagnosis of diabetes (except gestational diabetes) to participate in the focus groups if they met one or more of the eligibility criteria: (1) History of gestational diabetes; (2) Abdominal obesity (waist circumference >88 cm) plus family history of type 2 diabetes or (3) Pre-diabetes (fasting plasma glucose 100–125 mg dL−1 or 140–<200 mg dL−1 after 75-g glucose load). Consideration was given to seek diversity within the target population (i.e. inclusion of women with previous gestational diabetes, pre-diabetes, abdominal obesity and family history of type 2 diabetes). The majority of the women approached agreed to participate. Those who agreed received a reminder phone call 1–2 days before the focus group meeting. The overall focus group attendance was 70–80%. Main reasons given for non-participation were transportation and other family responsibilities.

A focus group discussion guide was developed by the research team and was pre-tested with five women to explore the feasibility of successfully conducting a focus group with Emirati women in a PHC setting. Topics included perceptions about current body weights, barriers to healthier body weights and programmes/activities needed for weight management in Emirati women. Based on this feedback, the focus group duration was restricted to a period not exceeding 1½ hours, including the time required for signing the consent forms and collecting participant demographic data.

Eight focus groups were conducted from May to December 2007 in PHCs in the Al Ain Medical District: two urban, four suburban and two semi-rural to include the views of women from various backgrounds. Urban centres are centres within the city of Al Ain while suburban areas are located 20 to 30 km from the city. The semi-rural centres are at least 40 km from the city. More focus group meetings were held in the suburban PHCs as more UAE nationals live in these areas. Focus groups were scheduled in the morning or evening following consultations with potential participants. Meetings were held in comfortable meeting rooms located in the participating health centres. Before the start of the focus group, participants signed a written consent form in Arabic, including the use of audio recording. Height, weight and waist circumference were measured using standard procedures (Lau et al. 2007). Body fat content was determined by bioelectric impedance using a portable Tanita Body Fat Monitor/Scale (TBF-531; Tanita, Tokyo, Japan) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Each focus group was conducted by two Emirati nurses trained in focus group facilitation (one acted as a facilitator and the other as an observer or note-taker) to create an environment conducive to ease in communication and acceptance with the participants. They were selected because of their focus group research experience, cultural and language competence and enthusiasm to participate in the research project.

The sessions began with the facilitator introducing herself, explaining the purpose of the meeting and assured confidentiality of the information shared. The facilitator encouraged participation of all members in the discussions using open-ended questions and probes when necessary. Interview questions were modified as the study progressed to seek further clarifications. Focus groups ranged from 5 (Group 5) to 13 (Group 8) participants and lasted between 45 and 60 minutes. At the completion of each session, there was a debriefing between moderator, observer and the principal investigator to discuss the most important ideas that emerged and possible differences with other previous focus groups. After eight focus group interviews, no new data were collected, which indicated topic saturation, and the focus groups were then concluded.

Data analysis
Original tapes were transcribed in Arabic and translated into English by the observer who attended the meeting. The session facilitator then reviewed the transcribed notes and checked the English translations against the Arabic tapes. The principal investigator read the observer notes and the English translations of the tapes. In addition, one of the authors (LB), an Emirati national, reviewed the English translations of three of the focus group interview tapes against the English translations.

Qualitative methods were used for data analysis. English translations together with the observer notes were imported into the Nvivo software for analysis (Nvivo 7.0; QSR International, PTY, Ltd., Doncaster, Victoria, Australia, 2006) to facilitate data management and analysis. As the interviews progressed, one of the authors (HA) analyzed the data from each focus group to inform the subsequent interviews by developing the preliminary codes and identifying important ideas, which were used to refine some of the interview questions. The constant comparison method (Strauss & Corbin 1990) in which each item is checked or compared with the rest of the data was used. Transcripts were carefully read and data with similar content were grouped together to develop the preliminary categories (free nodes). Free nodes were examined for interrelationships and organised into categories (tree nodes). Tree nodes were then systematically compared, grouped into themes and examined for interrelationships to develop the conceptual framework representing the data. The other two authors independently reviewed the coding assignment of the data and commented on the appropriateness of the coding categories and the emerging themes. Differences were resolved through discussion and consensus. All three authors contributed to the development of the conceptual framework emerging from the data.

Data trustworthiness
A number of qualitative research rigour measures were employed, including credibility, authenticity and confirmability (Mays & Pope 2000, Whittemore et al. 2001, Fade 2003) to ensure data trustworthiness. To ensure an accurate recording of the participant responses, focus groups were audiotaped, transcribed verbatim and translations were subjected to independent reviews (credibility). Data confirmability was achieved through independent reviews and consensus of the coding scheme by the research team. The authenticity of the results is supported by participant quotes.