 Da Silva, S. and Costa Maia, A. (2012) Obesity and
treatment meanings in bariatric surgery candidates: A
qualitative study. Obesity Surgery,

Background
This study used a qualitative approach to comprehend how the morbid obese conceptualize and deal with obesity and obesity treatment, with the particular aim of exploring the expectations and beliefs about the exigencies and the impact of bariatric surgery.
Methods
The study population included 30 morbid obese patients (20 women and 10 men) with a mean age of 39.17 years (SD = 8.81) and a mean body mass index of 47.5 (SD = 8.2) (reviewer #2, comment #9) interviewed individually before surgery using open-ended questions. The interviews were audiotaped, transcribed, and then coded according to grounded analysis methodology.
Results
Three main thematic areas emerged from the data: obesity, eating behavior, and treatment. Obesity is described as a stable and hereditary trait. Although participants recognize that personal eating behavior exacerbates this condition, patients see their eating behavior as difficult to change and control. Food seems to be an ever-present dimension and a coping strategy, and to follow an adequate diet plan is described as a huge sacrifice. Bariatric surgery emerges as the only treatment for obesity, and participants highlight this moment as the beginning of a new life where health professionals have the main role. Bariatric surgery candidates see their eating behavior as out of their control, and to commit to its demands is seen as a big sacrifice. For these patients, surgery is understood as a miracle moment that will change their lives without requiring an active role or their participation.
Conclusion
According to these results, it is necessary to validate them with qualitative and quantitative studies (reviewer #2, comment #3); it is necessary to promote a new awareness of the weight loss process and to empower patients before and after bariatric surgery.

Methodology
Method
Sample
Thirty patients (20 women and 10 men) from a multidisciplinary treatment center for obesity in northern Portugal
were interviewed before bariatric surgery (adjustable gastric
band and sleeve gastrectomy). All patients had several failure previous attempts to lose weight and were integrated in
several consultations, namely eating education their characteristics are shown in Table 1.
Procedure
Participants signed that they gave informed consent to
inclusion in the study and for audiotaping the interviews,
which were approved by the Clinical Research Ethics
Committee of the Hospital of Braga. The interviews took
place at the hospital before surgery. All interviews were
audiotaped and transcribed verbatim. The interviews lasted
between 20 and 80 min and included open-ended questions such as “How was it for you, living with the weight
gain?”“What led you to seek this treatment?”“What is
your relationship with food like?” “What do you expect to
happen after surgery?”.
Data Interpretation and Analysis
Interview data was analyzed using initial steps of the grounded
analysis method of qualitative research [16–19]. The basic
premise essential to grounded analysis is that the phenomena
comprehension must emerge from the data rather than from
preconceived notions formulated by the researcher. This must
go beyond a purely descriptive account to a theoretical formulation of the phenomenon being studied. The data collection
and analysis were deliberately interweaved, a process known
as theoretical sampling, so that subsequent questions could be
revised to reflect and check the emergent categories [20].
Theoretical saturation was used to compose the sampling.
The interviews were transcribed verbatim and consecutively analyzed with NVivo 8.0 software according to the
constant comparative method. Following these guidelines,
the first step of the analysis was open coding. Data were
examined line by line in order to identify the participants’
descriptions of thought patterns, feelings, and actions related
to the themes mentioned in the interviews. The derived
codes were formulated in words closely resembling those
used by the participants. This was an attempt to maintain the
semantics of the data. Codes were compared to verify their
descriptive content and to confirm that they were grounded
in the data. As a second step, the codes were sorted into
categories. This was done by constant comparisons between
categories, and between categories, codes, and interview
protocols. Data collected at later stages in the study were
used to add, elaborate, and saturate codes and categories. In
practice, the steps of analysis were not strictly sequential;
rather, we moved forward and backward, constantly reexamining data, codes, categories, and the whole model.
Core categories were identified, allowing the attaching
of all concepts together and unifying them allowing to
understand the obesity phenomena. To ensure the validity
of the analysis and the coding process, a second researcher
was consulted as auditor (an independent researcher that discussed and validated the categories) throughout the entire data
analysis process to assist the primary author by challenging
ideas and assisting in the construction of the categories
[16–19].
Results
Three core processes emerged: obesity, eating behavior, and
treatment. Obesity is, mainly, understood as an internal
immutable problem, affecting all life dimensions (professional, interpersonal, and personal). Eating behavior seems
to play an important role in the maintenance of obesity, and
it is always present and controlling the patient’s life. At the
same time, it is perceived as a coping strategy to deal with
some events and imbued with negative feelings, and it is
perceived as a loss of control. The treatment, especially the
surgery, seems to be perceived as a miracle moment that will
solve all life’s problems.
Table 2 shows a more elaborate description of the categories and patients’ transcriptions to illustrate and facilitate
understanding.
Table 1 Socio-demographic characterization of the sample
Variable Mean SD
Age 39.17 8.81
Weight (kg) 122.43 kg 14.10
Bone body mass index (kg/m2
) 47.50 8.20
N %
Gender Female 20 67
Male 10 33
Marital status Married 28 94
Divorced 2 6
Education 4 years 6 20
9 years 15 50
High school 9 30
Professional status Full-time 21 70
Part-time 2 6
Unemployed 5 18
Retired 2 6