Jones, N. Furlanetto, D. Jackson, A. and Kinn, S. (2007)
An investigation of obese adults’ views of the outcomes
of dietary treatment. Journal of Human Nutrition and
Dietetics, 20, 486-494.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-277X.2007.00810.x


Abstract
Background  Although recommendations about the treatment of obesity have been well documented, there is little research into how obese individuals view the outcomes of dietary treatment. It has been suggested that patient involvement in evaluating treatment outcomes may help target issues to assist with the ongoing improvement of dietetic services. The aim of this qualitative study was to collect patients’ views on the dietetic service, the treatment outcomes in terms of lifestyle change and the impact that attending the dietetic service had on their lives in order to improve dietetic treatment, and to assist in the selection of appropriate outcome measurements in the future.
Methods  Semi‐structured interviews were conducted with 24 obese patients attending dietetic clinics in Ayrshire, West of Scotland for weight management (advice on healthy eating and physical activity to achieve an energy deficit). Patients’ views were transcribed, grouped and coded using content analysis.
Results  Views included the importance of attending the dietitian for support to achieve weight management and a need to ‘feel accountable to someone’. Interviewees valued information provided regarding diet, physical activity, behavioural strategies and the risks of obesity. Patients described the impact of obesity on their lives and identified changes to their lifestyles and health since attending the dietitian. They also identified barriers to change, e.g. feeling frustrated and overwhelmed about the changes necessary.
Conclusion  This study extends the current knowledge of patients’ views of their treatment outcomes, which may be important in helping dietitians devise appropriate patient‐centred outcome measures. However, as this is a small sample, further long term research into a wider range of current and discharged patients’ views is required.


Methodology
This qualitative study aimed to collect patients’
views via semi-structured, one to one interviews.
Participants were recruited by community dietitians at primary care dietetic clinics in Ayrshire,
West of Scotland on the basis of being treated for
obesity (receiving advice on healthy eating and
physical activity to achieve an energy deficit). All
adult obese patients [body mass index (BMI)
greater than or equal to 30 kg m)2
, or greater
than or equal to 28 kg m)2 with obesity-related
complications] attending the clinics for weight
management advice, were informed of the study
when they attended their appointment and asked
whether they would like to participate. The only
criteria for patients to be involved in the study
Obese adults’ views of dietary treatment 487
 2007 The Authors. Journal compilation.  2007 The British Dietetic Association Ltd 2007 J Hum Nutr Diet, 20, pp. 486–494
were ‘willingness to be part of the study’ and BMI
as described earlier. The interviews were carried
out by researchers from varied health backgrounds to determine whether this influenced the
views expressed by patients. Interviewers included a dietitian (not involved in the treatment
of the patients) and two health researchers.
Patients were informed about the background of
the interviewer on recruitment and again at
interview. The initial aim was to recruit 50 patients; however recruitment was stopped after 24
interviews as it appeared that a ‘saturation point’
was reached when there were no new themes
emerging from patients’ comments (Strauss &
Corbin, 1998).
Informed consent was obtained from all participants on recruitment. Confidentiality and
anonymity was maintained throughout the research via the use of identification codes. Ethical
permission and research governance approval
were granted by Ayrshire and Arran NHS Trust
Research Ethics Committee and Glasgow Caledonian University.
Interviews took place in participants’ homes
and were semi-structured, involving a series of
open-ended questions and probes based on an
interview schedule, allowing participants to expand on any areas of particular interest. Topics
included their dieting history, their views on the
advice given, the changes that they had been able
to make, the barriers that had made its difficult for
them to make changes and the impact that lifestyle
change had had on their lives. Interviews were
recorded and participant details, such as age, level
of activity, gender and reason for dietetic referral
were also collected.
The interviews were transcribed, and content
analysis was conducted using the constant comparison method (Pope & Mays, 1999). The views
and comments of the participants were noted,
grouped and coded according to themes and
subthemes in order to identify any trends in the
range of views regarding dietary treatment and
outcomes. Codes were also used to indicate
implications and impressions made by the patient,
for example their level of concern regarding their
weight. Each interview was then re-read and the
themes allocated manually to each view. Finally,
the list of codes was examined to ensure that all
possible, potential themes had been recorded and
nothing omitted. Interviews were coded by two
health professionals, one of whom had also conducted 10 of the interviews. This strategy allowed
for an appraisal of any potential differences in the
interpretation of the data.